

Next Generation JavaScript: Intro to EcmaScript 2015/ES6
========================================================

Before to start with the new standard of JavaScript we have to take attention to the next standard versions considerations:

1. ES5
    - Standard fully supported in all modern browser.
    - Ready to be used since 2016.
2. ES6/ES2015 
    - Standard partially supported in modern browsers, no support in older browsers.
    - Can't use it in production in 2016. You have to setup a transpiler.
3. ES2016, ES2017
    - Standard no support in morder browsers
    - Can't use it in production in 2016. You have to setup a transpiler.

Below a list with the ES6 feaures we will cover in this section:

- Variables Declarations with `let` and `const`
- Blocks and IIFEs
- Strings
- Arrow Functions (Maybe the most important feature)
- Destructuring
- Arrays
- The Spread Operator
- Rest and Default Parameters
- Maps
- Classes and subclasses
- How to use ES2015/ES6 today

Please check [the comparative table of the ES6 features supported by browser](http://kangax.github.io/compat-table/es6/).

Variable Declarations with `let` and `const`
--------------------------------------------

We can introduce the keywords `let` and `const` with comparative `var` examples:

```javascript
//ES5
var i = 21;

for(var i = 0; i > 5; i++) {
    console.log(i);
}

console.log(i); //-> 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

//ES6

let j = 21;

for(let i = 0; j > 5; i++) {
    console.log(i); //-> 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
}

console.log(j); //-> 21
```

As you can see, the outputs in the console are different when you use `let` variable declaration. That is due to the scope associated with each keyword. Now let's check an example with `const`;

```javascript
//ES5
function statalLicense5(passedTest) {
    if(passedTest) {
        var firstName = 'Edward Elric';
        var yearOfBirth = `1990`;
    }
    
    console.log(firstName + ', born in ' + + ', is now officially a statal alchemist')
}


//ES6
function statalLicense6(passedTest) {
    if(passedTest) {
        let firstName = 'Edward Elric';
        const yearOfBirth = `1990`;
        console.log(firstName + ', born in ' + + ', is now officially a statal alchemist')
    }
    
    // console.log(firstName + ', born in ' + + ', is now officially a statal alchemist') //-> Throw ReferenceError: firstName is not defined.
}
```

After this examples we have the next conclusions:

- Use `let` to define variables that will change his value (as indexes).
- Use `const` to define variables that will **not** change his value (as a year of birth).
- `let`and `const` are variables definitions block-scoped and `var` is function-scoped. A block is all the code wrapped by `{}`.
- You can't define a `const` var definition outside of the block where you will use the variable.
- `let`and `const` are variables with **temporal-dead zone**. This means that the variables are hoisted, but we still cannot access them before they are declared.

Blocks and IIFEs
----------------

The concept of **block-scoped** is related to data privacy. Remember that in ES5 we get data privacy through IIFEs. In ES6 we can cleanly define data privacy but we have to take care of some considerations. The next code is an example of data privacy in ES6 with block-scoped and his equivalent in ES5:

```javascript
//ES5

(function({
    var a = 1;
})();

console.log(a) //-> Uncaught ReferenceError.


//ES6
{
    let b = 2;
    const c = 3;
    var d = 4;
}

console.log(b + c) //-> Uncaught ReferenceError.
console.log(4); //-> 4
```

As you can see, if you try to access the de variables `b` and `c` out of the block-scope you will get a reference error. However, if you see the `d` variable we have access to it, and this is because we declare the variables using the `var` keyword, then the variable is function-scoped instead of block-scoped, allowing then the access to it.

String in ES6
-------------

A good improvement of ES6 is the handle on `string`. The next code is an example of how we had to manage string in ES5:

```javascript
var firstName = "Edward";
var lastName = "Elric";
var yearOfBirth = 1990;

function calculateAge(yearOfBirth) {
    return 2018 - yearOfBirth;
}

console.log('This is '+ firstName + ' ' + lastName - '. He born in ' + yearOfBirth + '. Today, he is ' + calculateAge(yearOfBirth) + ' years old.' );

```

Now, ES6 offer the feature of **literal templates**. This is a new and clean way to use strings in JavaScript. The next code is the last example for ES6:

```javascript
let firstName = "Edward";
let lastName = "Elric";
const yearOfBirth = 1990;

function calculateAge(yearOfBirth) {
    return 2018 - yearOfBirth;
}

console.log(`This is ${firstName} ${lastName}. He was born in ${yearOfBirth}. Today he is ${calculateAge(yearOfBirth)} years old`);
```

Now it is easier read this strings. Also the `String` primitive now has some impressive methods:

```javascript
const name = 'Edward Elric';

console.log(name.startsWith('E')) //-> true
console.log(name.startsWith('e')) //-> false
console.log(name.endsWith('c')) //-> true
console.log(name.endsWith('x')) //-> false
console.log(name.startsWith('E')) //-> true
console.log(name.includes(' ')) //-> true
console.log(`${name} `.repeat(3)) //-> Edward Elric Edward Elric Edward Elric
```

Arrow Functions
---------------

To explain the arrow functions let's consider the next example: Imagine that we want to calculate the age for each year stored in an array. Below the solution in ES5:

```javascript
//ES5
const years = [1991, 1958, 1962, 1982, 1984, 1995];

var ages5 = years.map(function(element){
    return 2018 - element;
});

console.log(ages5); //-> [27, 60, 56, 36, 34, 23]
```

Now it's time to solve this problem with arrow functions. The arrow function has the next three scenarios:

- When the callback function has just one argument and one line of code.
- When the callback function has several arguments and one line of code.
- When the callback function has several arguments and several lines of codes.

Check these scenarios in the next code:

As you can see, arrow functions use the **arrow operator** `=>` to reduce the syntax of the callback functions in ES5. That is just a sketch of the improvements proposed in ES6 with arrow functions.

```javascript
//ES6
const years = [1991, 1958, 1962, 1982, 1984, 1995];
let ages6 = years.map(element => 2018 - element);

ages6 = years.map((element, index) => console.log(`Age element ${index + 1}: ${element}`));
/**
Will print in console:
[
    Age element 1: 1991,
    Age element 2: 1958,
    Age element 3: 1962,
    Age element 4: 1982,
    Age element 5: 1984,
    Age element 6: 1995,
]
*/

ages6 = years.map((element, index) => {
    let now = new Date().getFullYear();
    const age = now - element;
 
    return `Age element ${index + 1}: ${age}`
});
console.log(ages6);
/**
Will print in console:
[
    Age element 1: 27,
    Age element 2: 60,
    Age element 3: 56,
    Age element 4: 36,
    Age element 5: 34,
    Age element 6: 23,
]
*/

```

As you can see, arrow functions use the **arrow operator** `=>` to reduce the syntax of the callback functions in ES5. That is just a sketch of the improvements proposed in ES6 with arrow functions.

Arrow Functions: Lexical `this` keyword
---------------------------------------

One of the most significant advantages of using arrow functions is that they *share the surrounding `this` keyword*. This behavior is described as **lexical `this` variable**. In other words, unlike normal functions, arrow functions don't get their own `this` keyword. 

Please check the `box5` example in the file `script.js`. If you remember in previous sections. In a method call, the `this` keyword effectively points to the expected object. But, in regular functions, the `this` keyword will always point to the global object (i.e., the window object). It is for that reason that the `clickMe()` method has the context of the `box5` object but the callback function of the `addEventListener()` isn't. To hack the expected behavior of preserve the expected `this` context, developer use two patterns:

- Store the `this` context in a variable and then used it. This variable is frequently called `self`.
- Use the `bind()` method of the function constructor object to set the `this` keyword manually, creating a copy of the function. We cant use `call()` or `apply()` because them call the function immediately.

With arrow functions aren't necessary to use these strategies thanks to the lexical this keyword feature.

> Do you have to be careful when using arrow functions at the moment of the track the surrounding this context shared. If you define an arrow function in a global scope that has a child arrow function, this child arrow function will have the `this` context of the global scope instead of the parent function.

Destructuring
-------------

Destructuring gives us a convenient way to extract data from a data structure like an array or an object. To illustrate this 
description we will use the next example that as usual is in ES5.

```javascript
//ES5
var person = ['Edward', 25];

var name = person[0];
var age = person[1];

console.log(name); //-> Edward
console.log(age); //-> 25
```

In this example, we store the items of the array in the `name` and `age` variables. However, if the array is composed of more than five items, this methodology will be annoying. Now let's see the same purpose in ES6:

```javascript
//ES6

// Destructuring in arrays
const [name6, age6] = ['Edward', 25];

console.log(name6); //-> Edward
console.log(age6); //-> 26

//Destructuring in objects

const object = {
    'firstName': 'Edward',
    'lastName': 'Elric'
}

// The name of the variables should match with the key names of the object
const {firstName, lastName} = object; 

console.log(firstName); //-> Edward
console.log(lastName); //-> Elric

// Yoy can assign other variable names with the next sintaxis
const {firstName: a, lastName: b} = object; 

console.log(a); //-> Edward
console.log(b); //-> Elric
```

ES6 offers a new intuitive syntax to destructure data structures. Following this syntax, we can achieve the same result of our example in ES5. In this block o code, we also see an example of destructuring over objects. Let's see a practical application of destructuring that is return multiple values from a function. In ES5, if we had more than one value that will be returned from a function, we would return an object. With destructuring, it got a bit easier. Please check the next code:

```javascript
function calculateAgeRetirement(year) {
    const age = new Date().getFullYear() - year;

    return [age, 65 - age];
}

const [currentAge, ageToRetirement] = calculateAgeRetirement(1991);

console.log(currentAge); //-> 27
console.log(ageToRetirement); //-> 38
```

Arrays in ES2015/ES6
--------------------

The next three features were added in ES2015 to do easier the handle of arrays in JavaScript:

- Method `from` to let go the `Array.prototype.slice.call()` hack to transform `nodeList` into `arrays`.
- The `for (const currentElement of {{array}})` syntax, to create loops without the  `(var i = 0; i < array.length; i++)` syntext doing the code more legible.
- The methods `findIndex()` and `find()` to retrieve the index and the value respectively of the items in an array that accomplish a condition.

The first method is in the section **Arrays features box examples** of the file `script.js`. The last point is showed next. Imagine that you have an array of ages and you want to retrieve the ages that are full age, get the index position of these ages and their respective value. Below the solution for ES5:

```javascript
//ES5
var agesArray = [14, 8, 22, 10, 17]

var fullAgeArray = agesArray.map(function(current) {
    return current >= 18;
});

console.log(fullAgeArray); //->[false, false, true, false, false]
console.log(fullAgeArray.indexOf(true)); //-> 2
console.log(agesArray[fullAgeArray.indexOf(true)]); //-> 22
```

As you can see, we have to return another array where the condition is applied and play with the `indexOf()` method of the `Array` object to get the index and the value of the item that accomplish the condition in the array. In ES6 we have methods that are more semantic to achieve these goals:


```javascript
//ES6
const agesArray = [14, 8, 22, 10, 17];

console.log(agesArray.findIndex(current => current >= 18)); //-> 2
console.log(agesArray.find(current => current >= 18)); //-> 22
```

Here it isn't necessary to apply the `map()` method to return the array where the condition is applied.

The Spread Operator (`...`)
---------------------------

The spread operator is a very convenient way to *expand* elements of an `array` or `nodeList` in places like arguments and function calls. But What means *expand* elements?. To answer this question let's consider an example where we will sum all the arguments of a function:

```javascript
function addFourAges(a, b, c, d) {
    return a + b + c + d;
}

var sum1 = addFourAges(18, 30, 21, 12);
console.log(sum1); //-> 81
```

Now imagine that we have these four arguments in an array instead of four different variables. So, How we pass this array as an argument of the `addFourAges()` function?. Let's check the solution in ES5:

```javascript
// ES5
function addFourAges(a, b, c, d) {
    return a + b + c + d;
}

var arrayAges = [18, 30, 21, 12];
var sum2 = addFourAges.apply(null, ages);
console.log(sum2); //-> 81
```

As you can see, here we use the `apply()` method of the `Function` object constructor. The `apply()` method receives the second argument as an array (remember that the first argument is the `this` context, but it doesn't matter now), and then calls the function with the elements of the array as arguments. So, now we can call the `addFourAges()` function without pass the expected four arguments. Now ES6 have a better way to do this:

```javascript
// ES6
function addFourAges(a, b, c, d) {
    return a + b + c + d;
}

const arrayAges = [18, 30, 21, 12];
const sum3 = addFourAges(...arrayAges);
console.log(sum3); //-> 81
```

Here is the answer to our question. In the code above we are expanding the `arrayAges` into its components, in this case `[18, 30, 21, 12]`. Under the hood, the `...` operator executes the code of the `sum2` example, but now it has a shorter syntax.

Another use case of the `...` operator is join arrays. Please check the next code:

```javascript
const familyElric = ['Hohenheim', 'Trisha', 'Edward', 'Alphonse'];
const familyRockbell = ['Winry', 'Pinako'];
const bigFamily = [...familyElric, ...familyRockbell];
console.log(bigFamily); //-> ['Hohenheim', 'Trisha', 'Edward', 'Alphonse', 'Winry', 'Pinako']
```

The `...` operator can be applied to `nodeList` objects as well. Please check the section **The spread operator box examples** of the file `script.js`. There we are grouping all the DOM elements that have text content with the help of the spread operator, and the set a style over these elements.

The Rest Parameters
-------------------

Rest parameters allow us *to pass an arbitrary number of arguments into a function *, and to use them*. The syntax of rest parameters is the same to the spread operator `(...)`, but the works different. Rest parameters receive a couple of single values and transform them into an array when we call the function with multiple parameters. Let's check an example where we will receive an arbitrary number of years and then prints to the console whether each person corresponding to these years is full age or not. As usual, we start with the ES5 solution.

```javascript
// ES5

function isFullAge5() {
    console.log(arguments); //-> Seems an array but isn't. Is an Object is you check the prototype.
    var yearsOfBirth = Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments);

    yearsOfBirth.forEach(function(currentElement) {
        console.log(2018 - currentElement >= 18)
    });
}

isFullAge5(1958, 1962, 1982, 1984, 1991, 1995, 2006)
```

In ES5 if we want to receive an undefined number of arguments, then we simply don't define any parameter for our function and then just use the `arguments` keyword. The `arguments` variable is similar to the `this` variable, and it's a variable that each execution context get access to. In the code above we notice that if we print the `arguments` variable, we get an object. For this reason we have to use the `Array.prototype.slice.call()` Hack, to use the `Array` methods over the `arguments` keyword. In ES6 the solution it's cleaner. Please check the next code:

```javascript
// ES6

function isFullAge6(...yearsOfBirth) {
    console.log(yearsOfBirth) //-> Is an Array is you check the prototype.

    yearsOfBirth.forEach(currentElement => console.log(2018 - currentElement >= 18));
}

isFullAge6(1958, 1962, 1982, 1984, 1991, 1995, 2006)
```

Again, ES6 offers a shorter syntax to handle scenarios that are confusing in ES5. Lastly, the big difference between the spread operator and the rest parameters is the place in which we use each of them: The spread operator is used in the function call, while the rest operator is used in the function declaration to represent an arbitrary number of parameters.

The Default Parameters
----------------------

The Default Parameters is a straightforward concept. **We use them whenever we want one or more parameters of a function to be preset**, so we want them to have a default value. We can achieve this behavior in ES5 with the ternary operator `?`. Please, check the next code:

```javascript
// ES5
function ElricPerson(firstName, yearOfBirth, lastName, nationality) {
    lastName === undefined ? lastName = 'Elric': lastName = lastName;
    nationality === undefined ? nationality = 'amestrisan': nationality = nationality;

    this.firstName = firstName;
    this.lastName = lastName;
    this.yearOfBirth = yearOfBirth;
    this.nationality = nationality;
}

var edward = new ElricPerson('Edward', 1990);
var alphonse = new ElricPerson('Alphose', 1995, 'Mei', 'xingsen');
```

Now, ES6 bring us a default parameters syntax that makes more natural for the developer the use of the concept. The following code is a the before solution in ES6:

```javascript
// ES6
function ElricPerson(firstName, yearOfBirth, lastName = 'Elric', nationality = 'amestrisan') {
    this.firstName = firstName;
    this.lastName = lastName;
    this.yearOfBirth = yearOfBirth;
    this.nationality = nationality;
}

var edward = new ElricPerson('Edward', 1990);
var alphonse = new ElricPerson('Alphose', 1995, 'Mei', 'xingsen');
```

Rest parameters and default parameters makes it easier to work with functions in JavaScript. So, they are a very welcome addition to the language.


Maps
----

Widespread use of JavaScript objects is to use them as **hash map**, which simply means that we map string keys to arbitrary values as we did earlier in the course with the `edward` object. There we use the keys `['name', 'age', 'job']` and then mapped the values to them like `['Edward', 27, 'alchemist']`. This is called hash map. Now in ES6, we have a new `key-value` data structure called `Map`, whose principal feature is that *we can use any primitive value or data type for keys*. In objects, we just can use strings.

To start with the `Map` data structure, we will create a simple quiz logic. Plese check the next code: 


```javascript
//ES6
const quiz = new Map();

quiz.set('question', 'What is the latest official name of JavaScript version?');
quiz.set(1, 'ES5');
quiz.set(2, 'ES6');
quiz.set(3, 'ES2015');
quiz.set(4, 'ES7');
quiz.set('correct', 3);
quiz.set(true, 'Correct answer. Nice work! :D');
quiz.set(false, 'Wrong answer, please try again ñ.ñ');

console.log(quiz.get('question'))
console.log(quiz.size);

for([key, value] of quiz.entries()) {
    if (typeof(key) === 'number') {
        console.log(`Answer ${key}: ${value}`);
    }
}

const answer = parseInt(prompt('Type the correct answer'));

console.log(quiz.get(answer === quiz.get('correct')))
```

In the above code, we use the next features of the `Map` data structure:

- `Map.prototype.set()` to create properties into the `Map` data structure.
- `Map.prototype.get()` to retrieve properties in the  `Map` data structure.
- `Map.prototype.size` to get the length of the `Map` data structure.
- `Map.prototype.entries()` to iterate over `Map` data structure. This feature isn't enabled in objects.

These four features are the main advantages of use `Map` instead of `object` to work with hash maps. Also, we use elements of ES6 like **template literals** and **destructuring**. You can check the [entire map methods](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/).

Classes
-------

Classes are one of the biggest addition to ES6. Classes don't add anything new to the language; they are synthetic sugar over the way we do prototypal inheritance in JavaScript. It means that classes make it easier to implement inheritance and create objects based on blueprints. In ES5, these blueprints are called functions constructors and we add methods to their prototype properties to make all the instances created through a function constructor inherit these methods. The next code is an example of function constructor:

```javascript
//ES5
var Person5 = function(name, yearOfBirth, job) {
    this.name = name;
    this.yearOfBirth = yearOfBirth;
    this.job = job;
}

Person5.prototype.calculateAge = function() {
    var age =  new Date().getFullYear() - this.yearOfBirth;

    console.log(age);
}

var edward5 = new Person5('Edward', 1990, 'alchemist');
```

Now let's see the same thing using ES6 classes:

```javascript
//ES6
class Person6 {
    constructor(name, yearOfBirth, job) {
        this.name = name;
        this.yearOfBirth = yearOfBirth;
        this.job = job;
    }

    calculateAge() {
        var age =  new Date().getFullYear() - this.yearOfBirth;

        console.log(age);
    }

    static greeting() {
        console.log('Hey There!');
    }
}

const edward6 = new Person6('Edward', 1990, 'alchemist');

Person6.greeting()
```

When you print the `edward5` and the `edward6` you will see two objects with the same body. Under the hood of JavaScript, the ES6 syntax convert the classes syntaxis to the code showed in the ES5 example. Some people are criticizing classes because they hide the object-oriented nature of inheritance in JavaScript and so beginners who don't learn about that, they may never really understand how inheritance works behind the scenes in JavaScript. Then the tip is to use ES6 classes after understand the **prototypal inheritance**.

In the last code, you see the syntax to use **static methods**. Static methods are methods attached to the class but not inherited by the class instances. Maybe this feature isn't helpful but is good to know that JavaScript offers it. The `greeting()`  method is attached to the class definition, that behind the scenes is a function definition, and so, it is also an object.

> Important points:
> 1. Class definitions are not hoisted. So unlike function constructors, we need to first implement a class, and only later in our code, we can start using it.
> 2. We can add a method to classes but no properties. Inheriting properties through the object instances is not a best practice, but it is something that ES5 allow us.

Subclasses
----------

Let's remember the context of the **Person** and the **Athlete** reviewed in the _Advance JavaScript_ section. In summary, the scenario is that an `Athlete` is also a `Person`, so we want to inherit the properties from `Person` and used them inside the `Athlete`. Additionally, `Athlete` has his properties. Then `Person` is a superclass, and `Athlete` is a subclass of `Person`. To achieve topic of inheritance between classes in the ES5 version we have to apply advanced knowledge in JavaScript. The next code is an example of subclasses in ES5.


```javascript
//ES5
var Person5 = function(name, yearOfBirth, job) {
    this.name = name;
    this.yearOfBirth = yearOfBirth;
    this.job = job;
}

Person5.prototype.calculateAge = function() {
    var age =  new Date().getFullYear() - this.yearOfBirth;

    console.log(age);
}

var Athlete5 = function(name, yearOfBirth, job, olympicGames, medals) {
    Person5.call(this, name, yearOfBirth, job);
    this.olympicGames = olympicGames;
    this.medals = medals;
}

Athlete5.prototype = Object.create(Person5.prototype)

Athlete5.prototype.wonMedal = function() {
    this.medals++;
    console.log(this.medals);
}

var rigoberto5 = new Athlete5('Rigoberto', 1987, 'cyclist', 2, 1);
rigoberto5.wonMedal();
```

So, in the code above, we have two important details to review:

1. Why we have to call the superclass function constructor with the `this` keyword?
2. Use the `Object.create()` method to create the expected prototype chain.

_First point:_ The reason is how the `new` operator works. This is the operator that we use to create a new instance of the `Athlete` subclass-object. The `new` operator creates a new empty object. Then, calls the athlete function constructor and sets the `this` keyword to the newly created empty object. In the **execution context**  the `this` keyword will point to the new empty object. Now, if we want a person property's `name`, `yearOfBirth` and `job` to be set on the new athlete object, then we need to call the person function constructor with the `this` keyword also set to our newly created athlete object.

_Second point:_ `Object.create()` Allow us to set the prototype of an object manually. For our case, we want that the prototype of the athlete will be part of the prototype of the person. With the `Object.create()` we can connect both functions constructors (classes) in our desired hierarchy.

Now, let's check the solution in ES6:

```javascript
//ES6
class Person6 {
    constructor(name, yearOfBirth, job) {
        this.name = name;
        this.yearOfBirth = yearOfBirth;
        this.job = job;
    }

    calculateAge() {
        var age =  new Date().getFullYear() - this.yearOfBirth;

        console.log(age);
    }
}

class Athlete6 extends Person6 {
    constructor(name, yearOfBirth, job, olympicGames, medals) {
        super(name, yearOfBirth, job);
        this.olympicGames = olympicGames;
        this.medals = medals;
    }

    wonMedal() {
        this.medals++;
        console.log(this.medals);
    }
}

const rigoberto6 = new Athlete6('Rigoberto', 1987, 'cyclist', 2, 1);
rigoberto6.wonMedal();
```

In the ES6 solution, the syntax is cleaner and legible. The keywords `extends` and `super` handle the connection between classes in the desired hierarchy and the `constructor` keyword handle the call to the superclass with the expected `this` context. When you print the `rigoberto5` and the `rigoberto6` objects we get the next body:

```JSON
Athlete {
    job: 'cyclist',
    medals: 2,
    name: "Rigoberto",
    olynoicGames: 2,
    yearOfBirth: 1987,
    __proto__: Person
        wonMedal: ƒ()
        __proto__:
            calculateAge: ƒ(),
            constructor: ƒ(name, yearOfBirth, job),
            __proto__: Object

}
```

This structure show us the expected prototype chain.